---
toc: true
layout: post
description: First of a series of receipes. Putting your project under source control with GitHub.
title: "git init 2021"
author: Eric M. Baumel
categories: [python, swift, data science, development]
toc: false
---

 by Eric M. Baumel

## Putting your project under source control with GitHub

> This is the first of a series of mini-posts of various computer housekeeping tips, initially for my own use. Hopefully these may also be some some benefit for others.

Source control with git serves several functions: 
- It provides a method of keeping track of changes made to your code, so you can roll back to a previous save if needed.
- If used with a remote hosting service such as GitHub, gives a convenient back up of your code in the cloud.
- Allows easy collaboration with other developers.
- Can be used by many providers for managing deployment.


### Let's get started:

* Install git on your system, if not alread done: [Git Install](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git)

* Make directory to hold project

> For iOS development: Create Xcode Project - start with appropriate project type

* Navigate to your project folder using the command line. 

* In Terminal put project under source control

	`git init`
	
* Add a `.gitignore` file

> A .gitignore file lists the files and directories you do _not_ want under source control, such as hidden files (.DS_Store on MacOS) , environment files (.env), secure credentials, venv and test directories, etc.

* Once you have files reeady to place under source control, list the files that have been created or changed.

		git status
	
* Track these files so they can be commited.
	
	`git add .`
	
* Commit the waiting files.

    `git commit -m “Project setup”`

Only push commits that will build and run.



* Test that project will build and run. Then:


Create new repository on GitHub

	git remote add origin <URL>
	git push origin main

Work in dev brach. 

    git checkout -b <new-branch>

Only push commits that will build and run.


