---
aliases:
- /python/swift/data science/development/2021/01/03/git-init-2021
author: Eric M. Baumel
categories:
- python
- swift
- data science
- development
date: '2021-01-03'
description: First of a series of receipes. Putting your project under source control
  with GitHub.
layout: post
title: git init 2021
toc: false

---

by Eric M. Baumel

## Putting your project under source control with GitHub

> This is the first of a series of mini-posts of various computer housekeeping tips, initially for my own use. Hopefully these may also be some some benefit for others.

Source control with git serves several functions: 
- It provides a method of keeping track of changes made to your code, so you can roll back to a previous save if needed.
- If used with a remote hosting service such as GitHub, gives a convenient back up of your code in the cloud.
- Allows easy collaboration with other developers.
- Can be used by many providers for managing deployment.


### Let's Get Started

* Install git on your system, if not alread done: [Git Install](https://github.com/git-guides/install-git)

* Make directory to hold project

> For iOS development: Create Xcode Project - start with appropriate project type

* Navigate to your project folder using the command line. 

* In Terminal, put project under source control.

		git init
	
* Create a `.gitignore` file.

> A .gitignore file lists the files and directories you do _not_ want under source control, such as hidden files (.DS_Store on MacOS) , environment files (.env), secure credentials, venv and test directories, etc.

* Once you have files ready to be placed under source control, view the files that have been created or changed.

		git status
	
* Track these files so they can be commited.
	
		git add .
	
* Commit the waiting files.

		git commit -m “Project setup”

> Only push commits that will build and run.


* Now that you have a local git repo on your system, get ready to save it on GitHub:


* Create new repository on GitHub. [GitHub: Create a repo](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/getting-started-with-github/create-a-repo)

* Push your local repo to the remote main branch.

		git remote add origin <URL>
		git push origin main

* Continue your work in a `dev` branch. This becomes your HEAD branch.

		git checkout -b <new-branch>


### Other Useful Git Commands


* `git log`         Shows all commits.
	
* `git branch -av`  Lists all local branches.
	
* `git remote -v`   List all remote branches.
	
* `git checkout <branch>`   Switches your HEAD branch.  

* `git branch -m <new-branch>`   Rename your HEAD branch.  

* `git branch -d <local-branch>` Delete local branch. 
	
* `git push origin --delete <remote-branch-name>` Delete remote branch.


